---
title: "A stand-alone Co mineral deposit in northeastern Hunan Province, South China: Its timing, origin of ore fluids and metal Co, and geodynamic setting."
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2018-11-08-Zou, et al., 2018
excerpt: '------'
date: 2018-11-08
venue: 'Ore Geology Reviews'
paperurl: 'https://doi:10.1016/j.oregeorev.2017.11.008'
authors: 'Zou, S., Zou, F., Ning, J., Deng, T., Yu, D., Ye, T., Xu, D., Wang, Z.'
citation: 'Zou, S., Zou, F., Ning, J., Deng, T., Yu, D., Ye, T., Xu, D., Wang, Z., 2018. A stand-alone Co mineral deposit in northeastern Hunan Province, South China: Its timing, origin of ore fluids and metal Co, and geodynamic setting. Ore Geology Reviews 92, 42-60. '
---

------

>Abstract: <br/>The Hengdong cobalt (Co) deposit, located in northeastern Hunan Province of South China, is hosted by the low-grade metamorphic volcaniclastic sedimentary rocks of the early Neoproterozoic Lengjiaxi Group. The Co orebodies strictly controlled by the NE- to ENE-trending Changsha-Pingjiang deep fault zone (CPDFZ) and its secondary structures. Occurring in altered breccias and cataclasites with similar mineral assemblages, Co mineralization is characterized by zoned alteration with predominant silicification and chloritization proximal to the orebodies, and sericitization and carbonatization distal from the mineralization. The integrated field and microscope observations reveal three hydrothermal stages marked by quartz + pyrite + muscovite ± chalcopyrite of the early-stage mineralization (E-stage), quartz + polymetallic sulfides + chlorite of the middle-stage mineralization (M?stage), and quartz + chlorite + carbonate of the late-stage mineralization (L-stage). Muscovite from both the E-stage Co-bearing altered breccia and the CPDFZ mylonite yield40Ar–39Ar plateau ages of 124.7 ± 0.6 Ma (1?) and 130.3 ± 1.4 Ma (1?), respectively, indicating an early Cretaceous mineralization likely associated with the last movement of CPDFZ strike-slip shearing. The ?34S values of pyrite and chalcopyrite ranging from ?1.5 to ?15.9% with a majority between ?7.5 and ?15.9%, and the lead isotope compositions of the pyrite (206Pb/204Pb = 18.156–18.761,207Pb/204Pb = 15.645–15.662 and208Pb/204Pb = 38.469–39.172) overlapping with those of upper crust, indicate a main crust-derived source. The chemical compositions of pyrite further indicate the ore fluids and metal Co of the Hengdong deposit are most likely linked to the meta-mafic and volcanic rocks of the Neoarchean to Paleoproterozoic Lianyunshan Group, but with a contamination by the wall rocks of Lengjiaxi Group and Lianyunshan granitoids. Fluid inclusion investigations from Hengdong deposit reveal the decreasing homogenization temperatures from 250 to 320 °C (peak of 280–300 °C) at the E stage, through ?220–320 °C (peak of 270–300 °C) at the M stage, and to ?150–230 °C at the L stage without obviously salinity (7.0–15 wt% NaCl equiv.) changed. In the M?stage, the presence of coexisting LV inclusions and V-rich inclusions with the similar homogenization temperature, consistent with the chlorite geothermometry data, is interpreted to be the result of fluid immiscibility, which was caused by cyclic pressure release during fault-zone movement. Combined with the Late Mesozoic tectonism of South China, the present data support the Hengdong deposit formed under an extension-associated tectonic regime most likely induced by slab roll-back of the subducted Paleo-Pacific Plate during the early Cretaceous. This extensional event not only caused the reactivation of the pre-existing structures as manifested by the CPDFZ characteristic of stress transformation from compression to extension but also likely resulted in the release of large amounts of Co-bearing ore fluids from the Proterozoic or older volcanogenic rocks. When the ore fluids migrated along the CPDFZ and its secondary faults, the decompression (adiabatic cooling) of the hydrothermal fluids shifted the ore fluid to the immiscibility field, significantly reduced the degree of cobalt undersaturation, and caused cobalt to precipitate, which finally formed the Hengdong Co mineral deposit.

Suggested citation: <br/>Zou, S., Zou, F., Ning, J., Deng, T., Yu, D., Ye, T., Xu, D., Wang, Z., 2018. A stand-alone Co mineral deposit in northeastern Hunan Province, South China: Its timing, origin of ore fluids and metal Co, and geodynamic setting. Ore Geology Reviews 92, 42-60. 