---
title: "Geochemical variations of the Late Mesozoic granitoids in the southern margin of North China Craton: A possible link to the tectonic transformation from compression to extension."
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2019-04-12-Zou, et al., 2019
date: 2019-04-12
venue: 'Gondwana Research'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gr.2019.04.012'
authors: 'Zou, S., Xu, D., Deng, T., Huang, Q., Yu, D., Zhao, Z., Ye, T.'
citation: 'Zou, S., Xu, D., Deng, T., Huang, Q., Yu, D., Zhao, Z., Ye, T., 2019. Geochemical variations of the Late Mesozoic granitoids in the southern margin of North China Craton: A possible link to the tectonic transformation from compression to extension. Gondwana Research 75, 118-133.'
---

>Abstract: <br/>The composition of the continental crust of the North China Craton (NCC) is more felsic than that of the average bulk crust, which is regarded to be the result of the delamination of the thickened lower crust during Mesozoic. However, whether the thickened continental crust existed and when the delamination event happened along the southern margin of the NCC are still debated. Here, we report geochronological, geochemical and Sr-Nd-Hf-Pb isotopic evidence that granitoids from the Late Jurassic Wuzhangshan pluton and the Early Cretaceous Huashani complex were derived by partial melting of the lower crust with different thickness. Our new data shows that the two lithofacies of the Wuzhangshan pluton were mainly formed between ca. 157 and 156 Ma, whereas the five lithofacies of the Huashani complex were mainly emplaced between ca. 132 and 125 Ma. The Wuzhangshan pluton and the earlier four lithofacies granitoids of the Huashani complex (ca. 160–125 Ma) both display adakitic geochemical features, which are characterized by as high SiO2 (63.26–72.71 wt%), Al2O3 (13.97–16.89 wt%) and Sr (413–1218 ppm) contents, and low Y (6.30–14.98 ppm) and YbN (1.55–4.43), and high Sr/Y (33?112) and (La/Yb)N (11.53–29.72) ratios. They also have high (87Sr/86Sr)i (0.7066–0.7086), and low ?Nd(t) (?9.9 to ?18.8) and ?Hf(t) (?11 to ?26) values, and two-stage Nd and Hf model ages ranging from 2.4 to 1.7 Ga and 2.7 to 1.7 Ga, respectively. In contrast, the late Early Cretaceous (ca. 125–110 Ma) granitoids have higher SiO2 (71.30–76.78 wt%) and lower Sr (64–333 ppm) contents, and lower Sr/Y (17–29) and (La/Yb)N (13.25–18.36) ratios, and similar ?Nd(t) (?10 to ?16) and relatively higher ?Hf(t) (?10 to ?14) values. These geochemical variations suggest that the ca.160–125 Ma granitoids were most probably produced by partial melting of thickened crust (>45 km) with eclogite, garnet amphibolite or amphibolite residues, whereas that the ca. 125–110 Ma granitoids were formed by partial melting of the thinner crust (<33 km). We thus suggest that the NCC likely underwent a synchronous tectonic transformation at ca. 125 Ma from a compressional setting with thickened crust to an intensive extensional setting with thinner crust at ca. 125 Ma, which demonstrates that the lower crust was most likely delaminated.

Suggested citation: <br/>Zou, S., Xu, D., Deng, T., Huang, Q., Yu, D., Zhao, Z., Ye, T., 2019. Geochemical variations of the Late Mesozoic granitoids in the southern margin of North China Craton: A possible link to the tectonic transformation from compression to extension. Gondwana Research 75, 118-133.